good morning everyone
when I was first asked to do a TED talk
I googled to try and find out a little
bit more about you know how it felt to
be giving one and one of the first
things I read was a speaker in the state
saying that she felt fine until she came
on stage and then she saw the timer
ticking down and it reminded her of a
bomb I was thinking that's the last
thing I need you know it's great
privilege to be here I think it's a bit
of a joke for an editor of a paper to
choose a photographer to open a speaking
event we're not renowned for our words
and and I spent the last 40 years hiding
behind the cameras I didn't have to
speak I'm here today and what I want to
talk about is stories and the importance
of stories to me I think the importance
of stories to everybody I'm sure today
you'll hear a lot of stories and by
listening to other people's stories I
think we can learn about the world about
other people and get a better
understanding so I want to talk about
three stories that I've done as a
photographer and how they've inspired me
and how in my life I've become part of
the stories that I document myself as
John said I was a fashion photographer a
music photographer for 10 years I
enjoyed it a lot of fun but always I
wanted to do something more with my work
and storytelling was always something I
wanted to do so 10 years ago I set out
to travel the world to go and photograph
other people in their situations and to
record their stories to bring them back
so that other people might understand
but this didn't happen overnight
when I worked as a music photographer
and a fashion photographer I always had
this nagging feeling that there was
something missing that I wasn't quite
using my skills productively now it may
seem very obvious the link now but at
that time I couldn't really work out how
I could use my photography to do
something useful so I gave up
photography I walked away from it
completely and aside
to declare work and as a care worker I
started looking after a young guy called
Nick Nick has autism very severe autism
but over the years are looking after him
we became very close friends I would
give him 24-hour care we would go off
and do things from swimming gopher walks
all sorts bit by bit though as I got to
know him better I realized that his
story wasn't being told he's self-harmed
he would punch himself quite a lot in
the interface and nobody really got to
see that so this is Nick he's described
his life as as living downstairs at a
party he said he could hear the party in
the kitchen but he felt like he was
always trapped in the basement in his
own little world wanting to be part of
the party but not able to walk upstairs
so I documented his life I started to
photograph it not really with any
intention of doing anything with the
pictures but just as a way of recording
and as I started doing that I realized
that I could tell somebody's story
through my photographs as I said Nick
would self-harm he would punch himself
in the face and nobody really got to see
that as we built up a closer friendship
he finally would allow me to actually
see him doing this and to document it it
was a moment of trust
the social services were not
particularly good at helping Nick and
they said that he wouldn't be self
harming as bad as we said so one day I
took a photograph of when he had really
been self harming we took that to the
social services and the reaction was
immediately incredibly different and
they managed to get a lot of help and
I'm glad to say now eight years later I
actually spoke to Nick last night and he
wanted to let me know that he was
feeling a lot better and he doesn't do
the self harming anymore
and in some small way I hope that the
photographs was a part of that process
the main thing it did is inspired me to
go out with my camera and to tell other
people's stories
one of the stories I did was in Kuta
belong on the border of Burma and
Bangladesh here the Rohan goes refugees
have been left pretty much to rot for
over 20 years this is a picture of the
unofficial camp at the top you can see
the official UN camp all these huts are
the unofficial camps literally the raw
sewage run through the camp the people
there have been forgotten so I thought
it was important to go and document
their stories so I arranged with the
village elder that people would come
along the next day and I would take
portraits of all these people and record
their stories so as the time went on I
turned up in the morning I put a big bit
of white sheet up and I started to
photograph these people suddenly though
everything got a bit out of control and
all that was still Dawn we were filled
in this small little sort of compound
we've made with literally hundreds of
people turning up with ailments and
diseases and just a hopeless situation
and that's exactly what their situation
is helpless a child with a tumor that
nobody helps who was slowly suffocating
and I got in a bit of a panic because
these people were coming up to me and
desperate and I was trying to explain to
the village elder that I was not a
doctor and I couldn't help these people
and the village elder turned to me and
he said no it's really important he goes
these people know you're not a doctor
but at least somebody is now telling
their story and somebody's recording
what's happening to them and it was a
good moment for me it was a realization
that maybe it was worthwhile going off
and doing these things another story
that inspired me was in Odessa in the
Ukraine and I was documenting a bunch of
street kids I ended up actually living
with them in a squat which I can say was
a experience many late nights of vodka
fueled violence with me sitting in the
corner my bag just going when was this a
good idea
now say it's moments like that and I
think why did I leave the fashion world
but they were great kids then on the
last day they took me down to the sea
for a sort of trip and it sort of
farewell so there they are drinking
vodka and then Serge who's the oldest
and the most violent he just got out of
prison for stabbing somebody comes
Reapers arm around me and says we go
swimming now I have to say I had a
Lonely Planet guide to the Ukraine and
in it it gave some advice and in that
advice was do not talk to the street
kids at no point leave your baggage
unattended and in all counts do not go
swimming so I was like I don't know if
this is a good idea
so his arm around me I'm like okay so
there I am I literally handed all my
camera's all my equipment to these three
kids and they took it it's kind of funny
to know actually if you look in the
background you can see the other Street
kids who didn't get in the water go why
would you get in that water but one of
the little kids lilyc he was the one
that had taken my camera and he started
taking photographs and he was really
excited by this camera and we talked a
lot about how I was going to get him a
camera and would return and we could
start to teach him photography he had a
real eye for things that's him
there that was taken on the last evening
I was there and I left
I've been staying but that night I left
to go and collect my things when I came
back in the morning he was dead he had
taken a load of pills and a load of
vodka and had passed out in the night
and didn't recover and again it was
another reminder of me why I should
record these people's stories because
their lives are important and it's
important for me to document them then
in February of last year when I was on
patrol in Afghanistan I said to man ie D
that's me down there somewhere I became
part of the story at first I was
devastated by what had happened
obviously I thought my work was over I
thought everything didn't make sense to
me and then I realized I never set out
to Congo to Angola to Bangladesh to take
photographs I went to those places
because I wanted to make some kind of
change and photography happened to be my
tool and then I became aware that my
body was in many ways a living example
of what war does to somebody and I
realized I could use my own experience
my own body to tell that story and it
was also by looking back at the other
people had documented
I thought of Nick and I thought of his
resilience I thought of the Roy Hingis
and the fact that they have no hope I
thought of lilyc and a lost life and in
fact it was the story that I've
documented that inspired me to get
through the last year to survive to get
back up on my new legs and to be able to
come and tell their stories but also my
own story so I did a self portrait
because I wanted to show everybody what
a bomb does to somebody but also to show
that losing your limbs doesn't end your
life that you can have what people see
is disability but not be disabled that
you can be able to do anything if you
put your mind to it and have belief in
it it's strange but in many ways I look
at where I was a year ago and I look at
where I am now and I realized that I
have a lot of things I didn't have then
I wouldn't be sitting here right now
this it hadn't happened I wouldn't be
able to have shown you those photographs
and to tell you those stories
I was lucky ten years ago when I sat
down and I tried to work out what I
could do to make a difference in this
world I realized that my photography was
a tool and a way to do it I think that's
what's really key is that we all could
be part of that wheel we can all be cogs
in the wheel of change we can all make a
difference everybody here has an ability
to use something to make a difference to
the world we can all sit in front of the
TV and go I don't know what to do about
it and forget about it the reality is we
can all do something it might be just
writing a letter it might be standing on
a soapbox and talking it might be just
recording somebody's story and telling
it to somebody else but every single one
of us here if we want to make a
difference we can and there is
nothing to stop us and we all have our
own experiences that we can use as well
so really that's all I wanted to talk
about today I just wanted to say that
life goes on all around the world people
are going through terrible things every
one of us is going through Aero and
terrible experience but if we share
those and we talk about stories then we
can inspire each other to get through
our own bad experiences I know that the
people I've recorded have got me to this
point and I hope in some small way the
stories I've been able to tell you will
help you get through things and in turn
I hope you all use your experiences to
help others thank you very much